---
name: ROSPaCe
paper: "ROSPaCe Intrusion Detection Dataset for a ROS2-Based Cyber-Physical System and IoT Networks"
pubvenue: Scientific Data, Vol. 11.1, Article no. 481
authors: Tommaso Puccetti, Simone Nardi, Cosimo Cinquilli, Tommaso Zoppi, Andrea Ceccarelli
paperlink: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-024-03311-2
date: May 2024
link: https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.6924364.v1
---
ROSPaCe is a dataset for intrusion detection composed by performing penetration testing on SPaCe, an embedded cyber-physical system built over Robot Operating System 2 (ROS2). Features are monitored from three architectural layers: the Linux operating system, the network, and the ROS2 services. We perform attacks through the execution of discovery and DoS attacks, for a total of 6 attacks, with 3 of them specific to ROS2. We collect data from the network interfaces, the operative system, and ROS2, and we merge the observations in a unique dataset using the timestamp. We label each data point indicating if it is recorded during the normal (attack-free) operation, or while the system is under attack. The dataset is organized as a time series in which we alternate sequences of normal (attack-free) operations, and sequences when attacks are carried out in addition to the normal operations. The goal of this strategy is to reproduce multiple scenarios of an attacker trying to penetrate the system. Noteworthy, this allows measuring the time to detect an attacker and the number of malicious activities performed before detection. Also, it allows training an intrusion detector to minimize both, by taking advantage of the numerous alternating periods of normal and attack operations. The final version of ROSPaCe includes 30 247 050 data points and 482 columns excluding the label. The features are 25 from the Linux operating system, 5 from the ROS2 services, and 422 from the network. The dataset is encoded in the complete_dataset.csv file for a total of 40.5 GB. The dataset contains about 23 million attack data points and above 6.5 million normal data points (78% attacks, 22% normal). We provide a lightweight version of the ROSpace dataset by selecting the best-performing 60 features. This includes the 30 features from the Linux operating system, the ROS2 services, and the 30 best-performing features from the network.
